---
layout: post
title:  Choice and Certainty
---

Where one must chose, one can never be certain.  In every decision that we make, unless compelled by the necessity of unfalsefiable truth, we restrict our knowledge about the world to some smaller set of moral concerns.  With every choice, our world becomes both less ambiguous and more morally suspect.  Our assumptions and beliefs, themselves largely born into us by forces beyond our control, must be ever more questioned by their own exercise.

The course of human history, I would argue, has largely been one of significant progress, both scientific and moral.  From Aristotle and Hammurabi to Einstein and Martin Luther King Jr., the progress of history, though slow and fraught with horror, has largely been the history of the ascent of man.  Now, more than any other age, is the Golden Age of Man.  Behind us, the amassed knowledge of thousands and before us a world of finite yet wonderful possibilities.

Yet, much of the world we live in seems to exist completely outside of our control.  Indeed, one can trace the empires of the mind through those expanses of phenomenology that were always in search of the reason, in search of How.   When man first saw the awesome and terrible power of fire, did he weep with joy at the light of understand in nature?  I doubt it.  Like all of us who have succeeded him, the most powerful compulsion in the face of the unknowable is the attribution of intent.   Fire must have a cause, and lacking some understandable cause, it must belong to some directed agency.  When the Prometheus of man first created fire on his own, he did truly steal it from the Gods.

Agency in nature is one of the most persistent mythologies of human knowledge.  Not just in areas of superstition but also of science.  When trying to understand the world, we often use metaphors driven by analogies of human agency in nature.  Even today, in the science of biology, one cannot help but hear the word "design" dropped carelessly between sentences describing the deterministic rise of simple organic life.  It is difficult for us to extract ourselves from that same agency that seems to suffuse the world.

The fallacy of agency is perhaps the most fundamental and profound of all the fallacies.  It's extensional properties distribute into almost all other unreasonable fallacies: causation fallacies, intentional fallacies, and wishful fallacies.  The world has no specified agency.  To admit otherwise would admit to violations not just of our own experience, where we have come to learn and explain what was previously mysterious, but also all forms of true logical inference, which rely upon causal inference to determine the relationship in state between to instances in time.

Violation is annihilation.  To upturn the fallacy of agency is to invite a whole host of questions about the world about which general philosophy may say relatively little.  Science, instead, is the purveyor of the probable and the necessary, and their logical forms must deny agency to those acts which can be proven to be causally necessary.  Two particles collided; they did not hit each other.  Mass is bound to act according to the fundamental force of gravity; heavy things don't pull lighter ones.  Science has succeeded in removing the prejudicial scales from our eyes, and will continue to do so until no more externalities can be admitted.

This is an argument largely given by induction.  As our ability to understand the world separates more and more from our ability to analogize and personify, the world itself loses the extensional quality of our own experience.  Though we may perceive the universe through our senses, the universe itself is insensate to or condition or our will.  Stars will shine, atoms will burst, and we will be left pondering the essential qualities of a system that, while permitting us no agency, leave us groping to understand its essential form.

In this sense, certainty is the annihilation of choice.  To look out into the universe and choose to be enlightened by its nature, we must within ourselves, at a level of nature which we can neither truly perceive and control, deny the necessities of agency that made that choice possible.  Left only with our logic, we must ask the question: what choice did we truly have?

Posed a somewhat different way, we may ask the question: can we construct the universe at this instant in time from any other universe at a time preceding this one?  If we admit, as I think we must necessarily do, that we cannot perceive future actions from present events, it becomes difficult to see how any other particle in the universe may not, in some way, inform our experience of the universe.  A distant photon, travelling at the speed of light, far across the galaxy, may strike a distant hydrogen atom, and may be reflected back into the telescope of an astronomer looking out into the night sky.  It what way can we construct that moment in time without that photon?  Even if we admit to ourselves that the information might be lost, individual atoms are not so forgiving.

Physicists may look on this argument and distain my example, not the least because quantum mechanics should disallow many of my assumptions.  They would look on the world as an essentially stochastiacal exercise of discovery, and would not necessarily admit to my view of necessity given the worlds mathematical uncertainty.  Yet, I would interject that uncertainty is not unknowable.  To my logic, the problem with Schrodenger's cat is not the photon or the cat, but the box: no matter how black, a box in this universe must always leak information.  What uncertainty may be said to exist in a world that works by exacting, mathematical rules, even if we cannot always percieve the consecents of all antecedents.

We cannot percieve the causal connection between all actions in the universe, but a lack of insight is not an excuse.  With rules beyond our current understanding, it is not difficult to imagine the universe is random, but as our understanding grows, it becomes less tenable to believe that the unknowable randomness must be considered truly random.  It seems entirely possible, if not probable, that the current state of the universe is both sufficent and necessary for any future state of the universe to exist.

If that conclusion seems extremely hard to believe, look out into the world and see what choices were involved in our individual genesis.  Your beliefs now are predicated on the beliefs of those long since dead.  Genes that we can neither control nor see, mutated over billions of years to form us.  That same biological process formed the trees that we see, the algae who's air we breath, the animals that feed us, and the trillions of other independent, live agents on this planet who have spent an indeterminate eternity doing before the invention of "choice".  In what way can we be said to be any different.  We hardly understand the brain's chemistry in full, but in our unknowing past, before electro-conductivity and organic chemistry, we gifted it with reason and choice.  Will we deny those same operations when we discover the brain's secrets? 

To return to our topic, chosing reason denies us other choices.  This, almost sadly, is the state of things.  We deny for ourselves what we cannot allow in nature.  But it is not entirely a loss.  If we must deny choice, we may at least delight in understanding.  If we must deny all fallacies, we can at least find joy in the truth.
